Raquel Aguayo
2/20/17
Introduction To Linguistics

1. Shayan Hashemi
2. Age: 20
3. email: shashemi@haverford.edu
Consent to being recorded: Yes
Willing to be contacted later this semester to follow up: “Sure! Absolutely.”



No One Answer:

The Ability To Connect




I wanted to learn about a bilingual experience tied to a cultural background with which I
was  not  familiar.  I  decided  to  interview  a  person  that  had  lived  in  Iran.  More  specifically,  I
interviewed someone from Tehran, the Capital of Iran; and learned about the bilingual experience
of  a  Persian  (Farsi)  and  English  speaker,  who  does  not  have  a  definite  answer  for  how
multilingualism plays out in his life or affects his communications, yet knows for certain that his
multilingual knowledge has given him the ability to connect with his past, his cultural background,
his future, and the world and people around him. (3)(4)

Shayan Hashemi lived in Tehran, Iran until he was three; and later moved to a city in
southern Iran because of his parents’ jobs (1) (3). When he turned fifteen, he returned to Tehran
(3). Yet, he did his last few years of high school in England. He is now twenty years old, and lives
in Haverford, Pennsylvania (2)(3).

Shayan can speak English and Persian with native fluency. He also took, “five years of
Arabic in Iran because its mandatory. You have to take certain courses, but that wasn't to know
how to speak.” (4) He clarified, “It was mainly grammar and just basically the skills we need to
be  able  to  read  and  write…  I  don't  totally  understand  it…”  (4)  He  added,  “I  took  elementary
Spanish at Haverford, so I have a basic understanding of Spanish as well.” (4) Shayan learned
Persian as his first language; and started learning English when he was around 6 or 7 years old (5).
However, he feels that he didn't know English as well as he does now until he was around 14 or
15 years old (5). In fact, he said, “I basically learned most of it after the age of 15 or 14 (5).”



1

Shayan feels most fluent in Persian, which he can read, write, and speak easily (6). In English,
though, he has close-to-native proficiency, “maybe a little lower than the native level, but close to
that…full professional proficiency or near native.” (6) He is not as fluent in Spanish or Arabic,
although he is familiar with both.



Spanish I know some basic vocabulary and grammatical rules, but I don't
think I can really talk well, and Arabic I can’t talk at all… I can just read
and write… And part of the reason is that we have very similar alphabets in
Persian, so it’s kind of easy to understand that. (6)


He does not currently use Persian as often as he used to,


I think I’m the only student on campus who speaks Persian. I think there’s
maybe  only  one  other  student,  so  when  I’m  on  campus,  I  just  talk  in
English…  I  only  speak  Persian  when  I…  talk  to  my  parents,  [and]  my
family. I have a lot of relatives in the U.S., so when I talk to them on the
phone, I just speak Persian. Even English with them…but mostly I speak
English because all my friends in college, they speak English so I would
say,  most  of  the  time,  English,  but  for  example,  I  read  news  articles  in
Persian, my Facebook has a lot of Persian posts, so I just see a lot of Persian
things, basically. But for speaking, mostly English. (8)



Not being able to speak Persian with anyone on campus makes it hard for Shayan to identify which
language is more dominant in different aspects of life. In fact, to Shayan, whether or not one
language is dominant is “a hard question” to answer, in general (7). He explained that because he
has been living in the U.S. “for the past, almost, two years” and before then he lived in England
for two years, it is difficult to answer whether or not he has a dominant language, and especially
to identify which one is dominant. (7)


I can’t really answer. I think, not a single language dominates, but I would
say it’s between Persian and English. Sometimes a little bit more English,
sometimes a little more Persian. But of course, Persian is my first language,
so I guess I’m better at that, for sure. (7)



But this does not mean that Shayan has a language preference, or is not comfortable with holding
conversations in Persian. In fact, he makes an active effort to maintain his first language. (9)




2

I speak Persian to my parents, complete Persian. And I always try to not use
any English words, when I talk to them. I just try to remember to speak
Persian without forgetting words. I think it’s important to remember my
first language, because a lot of people, when they move to another country,
they forget their first language. So, I think it’s something that I really like.
I don't really care that much, but it’s something nice to just to speak the
language itself without using words from other languages. (9)


His conscious choice of language comes down to necessity. “When I was a child I was in Iran so
I spoke Persian; and right now, I’m in college, so I speak English…” (10) Ultimately, like Shayan
said, what language is used depends on context and necessity. However, code-switching is not
always  a  conscious  choice  for  Shayan.  It  seems  that  most  of  the  time,  there  are  aspects  of
bilingualism that one does not think about, since it becomes a part of life— it becomes unconscious.
Questions about unconscious experiences of code-switching were particularly hard for Shayan to
be sure about. At times, it was hard for Shayan to think of an answer at all. Answering what
language he thinks in was particularly tricky.


Oh, this is really hard to answer. It changes all the time. Sometimes I think
in Persian, sometimes in English. And it depends. For example, if I visit my
country for a month, then I just think only in Persian, but if I just don't talk
to my parents or my relatives for a couple of weeks—that doesn’t happen,
but in case, when I really speak English a lot, constantly for some time, I
just feel that I think primarily in English, and especially when I write essays
or just read… But it changes. I don't have just one response. (14)


It  seems  that  the  multilingual  experience  not  only  varies  among  multilinguals,  but  throughout
everyday dynamics of each multilingual individual. Shayan dreams in Persian, usually. He thinks
it’s due to it being his first language. “It’s hard to answer. I think mostly Persian. Sometimes
English, but mostly Persian. I guess that's because it’s my first language.” (15) Questions about
unconscious experiences of code-switching were not just hard, but sometimes resulted in shocking
answers. Shayan himself was surprised, when asked about the language he uses when he’s angry
or sad.


Oh, this is really interesting. English comes out. So usually, when I’m a
little bit sad or a little bit angry, I just think more in English, and I find that
really interesting, because normally, I should— I guess I should speak in
Persian or think in Persian when I’m sad or angry, it doesn't happen often,



3

rarely...  But  I  think  I  think  more  in  English  when  I’m  not  happy  with
something, and I don't know why. It’s something that's really interesting to
me as well. (16)


Shayan does not act differently depending on the language he uses, but is clear that there is no one
way, at least for Shayan, to answer how multilingualism plays out. (27)

There is also no one way in which multilingualism affects Shayan’s daily conversations.
On the one hand, he thinks that there are aspects of multilingualism that might cause others to treat
one differently.





…I used to have a… stronger accent when I first left my country. So maybe
that could’ve affected the way people basically acted with me at the time in
High School, and possibly in college. I don't know. I have no idea, but I
think… having a foreign accent… it's just something that could make others
treat you a little bit differently. Not necessarily negative at all, maybe even
positive… just something that I think really affects daily communications.
(32)

On the other hand, most of Shayan’s bilingual experience, if not all, has been positive. “Well I'm
not sure about cons really but there are lots of Pros… I can't think of any particular cons actually
I think there's nothing really negative about knowing more than one language.” (31) “I wouldn't
say  I've  been  judged  negatively  for  being  bilingual,  but  positively  for  sure.  When  I  go  to  my
country and speak English, a lot of people quite like it. So, I would say that's kind of the positive
aspect of it…” (32)

An effect of multilingualism that Shayan is aware of, however, is that it allows him to
connect with his past, his cultural background, his future, and the world and people around him.
For instance, he associates each language with different things. Shayan associates Farsi with his
past and his cultural background.





Persian/ Farsi it’s just something that, well, I associate my country with it
for sure because I think Iran is, I mean there are a few countries that speak
Persian, but Iran is the only country that speaks the Persian, that I know of.
So, there are two other countries that also their language is Persian, but the
dialects are very different. So definitely I think it’s something I think very
particular to Iran, and it reminds me of my country, my classmates back in
elementary school Junior high school part of my high school and my family
and it’s just something that I really …I really love the language. Honestly,

4

I think it's a beautiful language (20). It has beautiful sounds and I can think
of Persian culture, poetry and just Iran’s history and I think those are the
things that I mostly associate Persian with. (20)


English, though, he associates with very different things, primarily, he associates it with the ability
to connect with a variety of people from different cultures and his future.


… when I think of English I think it's the most commonly used language,
so I see it just as a tool to just be able to communicate with people from a
variety of countries and cultures and to just learn a lot about the world an
being able to just explore a lot of things, because without knowing English
my world would’ve been completely different so I just see it as a really
really awesome tool to just develop myself as an individual and I really like
the language, of course. I really like English and its literature… I also like
English accents a lot… I think they’re really fascinating. Different accents,
British, American, other accents in the English language, I think they’re
really interesting. (20)



Overall, to Shayan, being multilingual means that he can have a different experience while
still being a regular person like everyone else; and allows him to connect with his past, his cultural
background, the world and people around him, and his future. “To be honest, I think I’m the same
person, so I don't think that using another language makes me a different person…” (19) Shayan
does not think that multilingualism makes him different to others. He considers himself to be
Persian.


I definitely consider myself an Iranian slash Persian I think that's really the
culture that I belong to, but having lived outside of my country for almost 4
years. I went to an International School for part of my high school… it's
hard to really learn everything about the American culture or the British
culture in a few years, but I have an understanding of them as well also I
would say Multicultural but specifically Persian if I have to choose only one.
(21)



But, although Shayan does not think that multilingualism makes him different to others, he does
think it affects the way one sees the world, how one connects with people, and what possibilities
one’s future holds. “…in some ways, you see the world differently when you think in one particular
language. I don’t know. I think that there’s a connection between the way that we perceive things
and the language that we think of them [in]…” (19)



5








…each  language  just  is  basically  associated  with  their  culture  most
languages and each language basically allows you to think from a particular
perspective so I think this is really valuable and I see it is a privilege to be
able  to  use  my  language  abilities  to  just  appreciate  the  world  and  in  it
understanding people and just everything. (31)

 …I think it’s something that has been really beneficial to me. I’m able to
communicate  with  a  lot  of  people,  especially  using  my  English;  and,  of
course  people,  family,  and  my  relatives  who  speak  Persian.  So,  it’s
definitely, something that I use on a daily basis, and I really appreciate it…
it’s really helped me a lot. Especially in the past five years. Moving from
my  country  to  other  countries  and  just  learning  a  lot  about  people  with
different backgrounds and cultures and I really appreciate the fact that I’ve
been  able  to  learn  a  second  language,  which  is  English.  And,  basically,
communicate with so many people using that language. (19)

6


