Aradia Jinsi
Google Translate Doesn’t Do Kashmiri

Name: Nikunj (1.)1

Age and location(s): 48. Currently lives in Maryland. Born in the Netherlands, grew up in several

locations in the Netherlands. (2. 3.)

Languages  mentioned:  10,  English,  Dutch,  Kashmiri  (also  known  as  Koshur),  Hindi,  French,

German, Chinese, Latin, Ancient Greek, and Japanese. (Ancient Greek, Latin, and Japanese were

only mentioned once) (4.)

Languages  and  reason  for  learning  them/when  they  were  learned:  Speaks  English  (spoken  at

home), Dutch (born and raised in the Netherlands), Hindi (Learnt from his friends in his 20s, he

is culturally Indian), German (K-12 schooling), French (K-12 schooling), and Chinese (Business).

Understands  Kashmiri  (Culturally  Kashmiri).  Also,  learned  Latin  and  Ancient  Greek  when  in

school and Japanese in college, but these have been mostly lost and were only mentioned once.

(5.)

Fluency: Fluent in Dutch and English. Mostly fluent in German. Decently fluent in French. “Gets

by” in Hindi because his grammar is not terribly strong. Understands Kashmiri. Described his level

of fluency in Chinese as “survival”. (6.)

Dominance and when used: English dominant, lives in the U.S. Used to be 50/50 in dominance

with Dutch and English due to growing up in the Netherlands. Looks for any excuse possible to

speak Dutch now with childhood friends and Dutch colleagues but doesn’t speak it with his family

(even those who do speak it). Speaks Hindi with wife and extended family. Uses Kashmiri only


1 Information in parentheses refers to which specific question or questions in the corpus of the interview are being answered. If a
question is not specifically mentioned, it is a larger question that is answered throughout this essay or is answered indirectly.





2

when in Kashmir. Speaks Chinese sometimes to connect with Chinese-speaking colleagues and

when in Chinese-speaking countries but never seriously; most Chinese-speaking colleagues also

speak English. Uses French and German only when in countries that speak it. (7. 8.)

Use  with  parents/siblings/family/homes:  Speaks  English  with  his  mother  and  brother.  Speaks

English in the home now, sometimes Hindi with his wife. His parents spoke only English with him

but he spoke Dutch in his community and at school. (9. 10.)

My father is a rather secretive man. He’d only mentioned knowing five languages to me

before,  those  languages  being  Dutch,  English,  Chinese,  Hindi,  and  Kashmiri.  I  certainly  didn’t

expect  him  to  eventually  come  out  with  ten  languages  that  he’d  learned  over  the  course  of  his

lifetime.



His  parents  were  Kashmiri  immigrants,  ethnically  Kashmiri  Hindus  who  moved  to  the

Netherlands for his father’s job. They spoke both Hindi and Kashmiri and spoke it infrequently

around Nikunj and his brother. He seems to have become an accidental polyglot due to the nature

of the many paths he’s pursued and the nature of the evolving world. For example, in college he

“misjudged”  whether  Japanese  or  Chinese  was  the  “language  of  the  future”  and  took  a  year  of

Japanese. Later in his life he was forced to learn Chinese anyway because he travels to China and

Chinese-speaking countries so often.



His voice is a little bit nostalgic when he talks about his experiences with Dutch. He used

to think in Dutch, apparently, but now almost all his thoughts are in English. (14.) When I ask him

“Do you dream in one language or another in particular?” he is caught a bit off guard. Nikunj says

he  dreams  in  English  now  but  used  to  dream  primarily  in  Dutch  when  he  lived  in  Holland.

Apparently, he used to sleep talk in Dutch. (15.) He left Holland more than two decades ago to





3

pursue his graduate studies in the United States, but always wants to hold onto his Dutch roots. As

he expounds upon this I’m reminded of his quiet insistence on my sister and I holding onto our

Dutch  citizenship.  However,  whenever  caught  on  an  offbeat  or  speaking  in  moments  of  high

emotion,  his  first  impulse  is  to  speak  in  English,  mainly  because  he’s  not  in  a  Dutch-speaking

environment and hasn’t lived in one for many, many years. (16.) Nikunj seems a bit happy to tell

me that he still sometimes mixes up Dutch and English words in private. (17.) When I ask him

about which cultures he belongs to, he mentions the Dutch and Anglo-Saxon cultures first. (21.)

He used to be more “outgoing” with friends and family due to speaking mainly in Dutch, he says

(partly  due  to  their  somewhat-more-abrasive  culture),  but  now  that  he’s  grown  accustomed  to

English (and American culture) he is more “held back”. (27. 28.) In my notes, I write: “associations

with Dutch—home, childhood.” (20.) He still visits his mother in the Netherlands quite often, and

every time he came back from the Netherlands when I was much  younger he used to bring my

siblings and me Dutch chocolate shaped like the initials of our names. None of us ever actually

finished any of them; he’d eat them himself when he thought no one was looking. I used to think

he did  this  because they were  especially tasty. Perhaps it’s really because they were especially

lekker (an untranslatable word that very roughly means “tasty” but can be used in many contexts).

(26.) It’s evident that Nikunj feels great pride in his Dutch heritage and in his speaking Dutch, and

it’s an especially niche language that allows him to connect very fluidly to other Dutch speakers.

It may not be a terribly utilitarian language but it is, perhaps, the one dearest to him.



I am a bit surprised when he later mentions that he only considers himself a native speaker

of Dutch and English. (18.)

“Not Hindi?” I ask, despite wanting to stay neutral.









He says that no, his accent would give him away immediately. (29.) His grammar is very

4

anglicized,  and  he  doesn’t  speak  it  very  confidently.  Though  colloquial  Hindi  in  general  has  a

generous heaping of English words sown into it, he isn’t at the level of a native speaker.  Hindi

and, by extension Kashmiri2, were languages that he was exposed to as his parents spoke them

fluently. However, he didn’t start speaking Hindi until his friends started learning it and he started

to learn alongside them. Nikunj’s parents never officially taught him either of these languages and

he never formally learnt them, something he seems to regret. He’d never speak Hindi in a business

setting. However, it’s still something that connects him to his family and roots and that he holds

onto quite solidly. Kashmiri holds similar meaning (ethnicity, family, roots) but he cannot speak

it to connect to native speakers. He says his associations with the language include much broader

and less personal concepts such as the long Mughal 3 history and the fact that it’s in some ways a

mix  of  Sanskrit,  Hindi,  and  Arabic.  (20.)  Nikunj  speaks  with  a  great  nationalist  pride  about

Kashmir,  even  though  he’s  never  actually  lived  there.  It  reminds  me  of  his  parents,  my

grandparents, teaching me random Kashmiri phrases over the phone when I was younger so that

the “glorious language” doesn’t die out.

While native speakers of Hindi may look at Nikunj and see him as another Hindi speaker

(before  he  opens  his  mouth),  native  speakers  of  Kashmiri  usually  don’t.  (29.)  For  example,  he

often uses his knowledge of Kashmiri to aid him in interactions with local people. I’ve personally

witnessed him get an especially good bargain out of some street vendors who were discussing, in

Kashmiri in front of him, the actual price of the bauble he was looking at Therefore, Kashmiri and


2  Hindi  is  one  of  the  most  widely-spoken  languages  in  India.  Kashmiri  is  another  Indian  language,  spoken  almost  only  in  the
contested Jammu-Kashmir region of Northern India/Southern Pakistan. Many ethnically Kashmiri Hindus speak both languages,
while Kashmiri Muslims tend to speak Kashmiri and Arabic.
3 The Mughal Empire was a dynasty of Muslim and Arabic-speaking peoples that ruled over large parts of Northern India,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan between the 16th and 18th centuries.





5

Hindi  occupy similar spaces culture-wise and, in some ways, use-wise both still fundamentally

serve him differently. Kashmiri isn’t something he can speak with his extended family, but Hindi

is (though not completely accurately). It’s something he’s still personally proud of, but it has less

nationalism attached to it, it appears. (20.)



Chinese was mentioned only a few times more than German and French. He mentioned it

strictly in business settings. He doesn’t use it to seriously communicate except when out and about

in  China  itself.  Again,  he  uses  it  as  a  connection  point  between  himself  and  Chinese-speaking

colleagues and business partners. German and French are used exclusively when in countries that

speak them. (7.)

He seemed to somewhat lament that most people now speak English rather than their own

native tongues. While writing this essay, I wanted to make a title using the same word in the ten

languages he knew, but I discovered that some of them weren’t available in online translators like

Google  Translate.  Nikunj  would  probably  agree  that  this  is  an  increasingly  important  sign  that

people need to document, speak, and learn many languages. Outside of our personal conversation,

while discussing the content of this interview with my family, he mentioned that Hindi and Urdu,

another Indian language, are so similar in how they’re spoken that he can basically speak Urdu as

well (though the written alphabets are very different). Perhaps this is an indicator that no one truly

knows what it means to be multilingual, and that the world of languages and linguistics is more

complex than any single individual can ever imagine. This is why linguistics is an important part

of society as we move forward, and why interviewing my father about his multilingualism was far

more rewarding, informative, and interesting than I could have ever imagined.




