 

Sophia MacKay 

Professor Lillehaugen 

Linguistics 101 

February 17, 2017 

MacKay 1 

 

 

 

The Divide Between Language and Culture 

 

Sunny is an 18-year-old bilingual speaker of English 
and a dialect of Mandarin. She was born in China, and 
learned English in school beginning in kindergarten. 
She generally speaks English in academic settings, and 
Mandarin both with friends and at home. In the 
interview, Mandarin is referred to as Chinese because 
that is the term she used. Overall, she views her 
bilingualism as something convenient and positive, but 
does not connect with American culture despite 
knowing English.  

I used this interview as a chance to get to know my roommate better. Like me, Sunny is a 

first-year student at Bryn Mawr (3). Unlike me, she is bilingual. Last summer, when I found out 

that my roommate was going to be an international student, I was a little bit concerned. I had 

never shared a room with anyone before, and now I was going to be sharing a room with a 

stranger from another country, another culture, for an entire school year. I was nervous when I 

met her for the first time during orientation week, but much to my relief, she was quiet, studious, 

and wickedly funny. Since then, we have talked about politics, religion, sexism, racism, death, 

and a variety of other topics, and discovered that our biggest difference in opinion is about 

whether the windows should remain open or closed.  

 

Sunny is 18, and was born and raised in Nanjing, China (1, 2, 3). She has a Chinese first 

name that close friends use, but she chose to use an English name whose meaning she liked 

better in Junior 1, (which is grade 7 in the U.S. system), and continued using it because she was 

irked by people’s constant inability to pronounce her Chinese name correctly (1). Sunny came to 

visit the United States in her junior year of high school, but did not actually live here until she 

came for college (3). She still feels that China, where her parents live and where she spends her 

MacKay 2 

 

breaks, is home. Although her current mailing address is a Bryn Mawr P.O. box, she asks, “How 

do you define the word “live”? I feel like I study in America, but I live in China” (3). Sunny 

speaks two languages, English and Chinese (4). When asked to clarify what she meant by 

Chinese, she explained that what people speak varies from region to region in China. About the 

particular version of Chinese she speaks, she says, “In my region, I know the kind of language 

we speak, I can listen to them and understand, but I don’t know how to say it. The kind of 

Chinese I speak is like Mandarin,” (4). She’s a native speaker of Chinese, and started learning 

English in school long enough ago, most likely in kindergarten, that she doesn’t remember the 

process (18, 5). She considers herself completely fluent in Chinese, her “mother tongue,” but not 

nearly as fluent in English (6). Sunny supposes that she’s fluent enough, considering that she 

lives in America, takes classes in America, and doesn’t have many questions about things... 

“except for philosophy,” she adds with a laugh (6). Fair enough; English is my native language, 

and even I struggle with philosophy.  

Living in America has not changed the fact that Chinese is predominant in Sunny’s life 

(7). She speaks Chinese at home, with her parents, with her friends, and most of the classmates 

she spends time with (8, 9, 10, 20). The social media she uses and the media she consumes 

(songs, shows, books, etc.) are in Chinese as well (8, 20). Sunny mainly uses English in 

academic settings, when talking to her American classmates and professors (and when talking to 

her roommate) (8, 20). As a result, she hasn’t lost any proficiency in Chinese, and has gained 

proficiency in English (13). After I ask her if a native speaker English would consider her a 

native speaker, she looks at me a bit incredulously, and replies, “I don’t think so…?” (29). 

Although Sunny’s command of the language is stellar, she does have a noticeable accent, and 

occasionally has to look up a word on her phone to find its English translation. About her 

thought processes, she says, “I feel like when I speak I actually think of Chinese/in a Chinese 

way, but the language I speak, I don’t really need to think of it in Chinese first and then translate 

it into English. If I want to say something, I just directly say it,” (14). She finds it quite easy to 

switch between the two languages, and she and her friends often do so in casual conversation, 

dropping English words into a Chinese conversation (30, 17). Sunny doesn’t behave differently 

in one language verses the other; any difference as a result of confidence issues with English are 

negated by the fact that she doesn’t “like to speak a lot when there are a lot of people” in either 

language (27). When expressing strong emotions such as sadness or anger, what language she 

MacKay 3 

 

uses is determined by why she is upset. She explained, “If I’m angry or sad because of what 

someone did, I have a reason, and sometimes the reason is kind of, like, built by English 

concepts, so language depends on why I get angry or sad,” (16). After so many years of learning 

English, speaking it comes naturally to her. 

Sunny is not bilingual by choice; her knowledge is the product of her school system. She 

doesn’t regret that she can speak two languages, but she does have some mixed feelings about it. 

“I do feel like it is kind of convenient in America for me to know both of the languages, but 

sometimes I feel like that I am losing the part of Chinese culture I have,” (19, 31). She doesn’t 

identify with American culture at all. Firmly, Sunny states, “I just feel like I belong to the 

Chinese culture. Maybe after several years my answer to this question will be yes, but currently 

no,” (21). She sometimes feels out of place, not because of any language barriers, but because of 

cultural ones. She describes one such situation: “When a group of native speakers are talking and 

I am listening sometimes I just don’t know what they are talking about or why that is interesting 

and they’re laughing and I just don’t know why, so it really makes me…” She trails off, 

frustrated, before continuing. “The only thing I can do in that situation is to fake that I am 

laughing, just laugh with them, whether I know or not what they are talking about, or just lower 

my head and watch my cellphone (32). Sunny spends most of her time, both in and out of class, 

with her fellow Chinese international students, whom she has an easier time relating to. She’s not 

comfortable striking up conversations with non-Chinese students. Describing her reluctance, 

Sunny says, “For Americans, I don’t know what I should talk to them about. I don’t know what 

kind of thing you [Americans] are interested in, so for most of the time, like, even when there are 

only two people, I am silent, except when I have questions to ask,” (28). 

Despite her feelings of cultural disconnect, Sunny hasn’t noticed much discrimination 

against her because of her bilingualism (32). The one thing she did note was that during the 

international student orientation, native English speakers spoke slower than usual to try and 

make sure they were understood, but she seemed more appreciative of that than resentful (32). 

Despite her fears about losing a part of her Chinese culture, she generally views being bilingual 

as a good thing. “You can go abroad, whether to travel or to study, or have other things, and it’s 

more convenient…and people just have this kind of feeling when they know more than one or 

two languages, of possibilities,” (31). Being bilingual opens doors, and for Sunny, it opened the 

MacKay 4 

 

door to Bryn Mawr. Despite her difficulties with cultural differences, she is enjoying herself 

here. Overall, in America, being able to speak English and Chinese has been a positive thing for 

her. Curious, I wondered aloud if there were any situations back home in China where she would 

ever pretend that she wasn’t bilingual (32). The interview ended on a comic note when Sunny 

laughed and replied, “I feel like the only answer for this question could be when your relatives 

ask, “Can you help my children to learn English much better than they do now?” And the answer 

to this is, “NO, no, no I don’t know how to speak English!”” 

