Tram Nguyen
Forced to Adopt a Mother Tongue

A 20-year old Chinese Singaporean majoring in English literature at Drexel University, Lee
Wang speaks fluent Singlish, Mandarin, and English. Although Singlish is her native language
and the main means of communication within her family in Singapore, Lee has been
practicing American English and Mandarin since relocating to the United States for college.
This interview will elucidate Lee’s perception of the Mother Tongue concept through an
interrelated discussion of her bilingual experience and Singapore’s language planning and
national identity-building process.

“How can we make sense of the terms mother tongue, native language, and dominant language?” I

inquire Lee, pondering whether this is a good question to initiate our conversation about

bilingualism. Lee admits that she has thought about these analogous terms before, “The idea of

‘mother tongue’ troubles me. I guess that for most people, the language that they learned as a child

at home, from their mom and dad, is their mother tongue. In Singapore, however, we have a mother

tongue ‘bestowed’ upon us.”

I met Lee two years ago through a mutual friend. My first impression of her was that she

spoke native-like American English, which distinguishes Lee from my other Singaporean friends

who converse in Singlish, an English-based creole language used colloquially in Singapore. A 20-year

old Chinese Singaporean currently in her junior year at Drexel University, Lee left Singapore—

where she was born and grew up—to study English literature in the United States with a goal of

becoming a TESOL instructor (1, 2, 3).  I have always assumed that her languages are English,

Chinese, and perhaps one other language, and my interview with Lee confirms that she considers

herself fluent in Singlish, English, and Mandarin (4, 6). To my great puzzlement though, Lee appears

uncomfortable when being queried to define and affirm her mother tongue, and asks me for

permission to return to this question later. She however immediately declares that Singlish is her

native and dominant language while English and Mandarin have been formally learned as “second

languages” since she entered elementary school (5, 7). Before coming to the States for undergraduate

Nguyen 2



studies, Lee used Singlish on a daily basis to communicate with her parents, siblings, and friends in

Singapore; English and Mandarin were reserved for more formal interactions such as academic-

related activities, co-curricular meetings, and interviews (8, 9).

Lee’s bilingualism provides the basis for her identity construction, instilling in her an abiding

interest in exploring languages and cultures, and allows her to more easily understand the complexity

and the subtlety of different linguistic expressions. Despite identifying herself as a language

enthusiast, Lee sometimes feels uneasy about her own process of acquiring languages. “It is not

natural. It has been all planned,” she said, mulling over how language planning in Singapore has

affected her identity as a Chinese Singaporean. According to Lee, language planning has played a

crucial role in Singapore’s nation-building process, especially after the country gained independence

from Britain in 1965. As Singapore encountered a postcolonial complex of a racially diverse society

characterized by the Chinese, Malay, Indian and Others (CMIO) quadratomy, its leaders were

confronted with the challenge of building a common national identity for all Singaporeans. In an

attempt to unite Singapore by stimulating a greater sense of collective identity, racial harmony and

cultural tolerance, the government elected English as Singapore’s utilitarian language that helps

create connections across ethnicities, encourage interactions among different nationalities, and

ensure social development and mobility. The government also affirmed that all the ethnic languages

play an equally important role in developing Singapore’s national culture, and thus initiated various

language movements and policies from the late 20th to early 21st century to promote the principle of

equal treatment to all languages.

Despite the principle of equal treatment, language discrimination or more precisely, unfair

treatment of an ethnic group based on their language practices, still ensues. Lee states the example

of the Speak Mandarin Campaign that the government launched to discourage the use of

“subversive” or “inappropriate” Chinese dialects such as Cantonese, Hakka, Hokkien, and Teochew,

Nguyen 3



which are deemed to hinder the amalgamation of a unified Chinese Singaporean identity. In

suppressing all Chinese dialects except Mandarin from school curriculum, entertainment programs,

and the mass media, the government endeavors to refashion language habits and preferences and

restrict the options that people can choose in their consumption of cultural products. The ban

means that some speakers of non-Mandarin dialects hold the status of a minority group and have no

authority over the way popular culture is delivered and made available.  For instance, Lee’s uncle

who originally came from Hong Kong can only watch Cantonese movies that are dubbed in

Mandarin because he cannot access any dialect programs on television. Furthermore, the most

serious consequence of the Speak Mandarin Campaign is the disintegration of familial bonds due to

the inability to speak dialects in the younger generation of Chinese Singaporeans— in Lee’s case, she

can speak Singlish or Mandarin to her parents, but is unable to communicate with her grandparents

in Hokkien (10). Daily correspondence between Lee and her grandparents is often reduced to simple

greetings and affectionate pats, and she finds this communicative gap to be a “family tragedy.” Lee

trusts that the generational transmission of cultural values would be deficient if the elders and the

youngsters do not share the same level of language proficiency (31).

Musing over Lee’s distress about her lack of familial communication, I ask her whether there

exists a similar communicative gap in the larger societal context and whether a mutual language is

necessary to unify the nation. She offers an intriguing observation that although Mandarin fails to

connect the Chinese Singaporean population, Singlish does aid the cultivation of a unified

Singaporean identity. It is extremely complex to conceptualize Singlish though. As I reveal my

confusion about whether Singlish is a language or a “dialect” of English, Lee acknowledges that

perhaps she is not exactly sure what Singlish is. With English being currently spoken by people all

over the country, rather than being used solely by the elite few during the British colonial period, the

language adopted a local flavoring that shares some linguistic similarities with Malay, Hokkien,

Nguyen 4



Cantonese, and Mandarin and prompted the formation of Singapore English, or Singlish today. The

Singaporean government even attempted to dismiss the use of Singlish through the Speak Good

English Movement, arguing that Singlish’s alleged incomprehensibility would make Singaporeans

culturally and economically incompetent in the age of globalization. As school officials and language

instructors wish to protect Standard English, back in Singapore, Lee studied British English in all

levels of schooling. She however feels like she had not really learned “real” English until she came to

the States. At Drexel, she must discard the use of Singlish because otherwise her professors and

friends would not be able to understand what she is saying (13). In addition, her dream to become a

TESOL teacher prompts Lee to further distance herself from Singlish and to practice speaking in

“perfect American accent” (11).

Given that Singlish is considered a substandard and undesirable variant of English and acts

as an impediment to cross-cultural communication, why does Lee believe that this language unifies

Singaporeans? Lee praises Singlish for its hybrid and liberating qualities, and as an irreplaceable part

of the Singaporean identity (20). “It is always fun to see people getting confused when I speak

Singlish at machine-gun speed,” she giggles, confessing her love for the language’s mangled fusion

of English phrases and Chinese grammatical structures with Hokkien, Malay, and Indian dialects

(17). She concludes that the construction of a society where everyone speaks Standard English is

futile, because language constantly incorporates different linguistic elements in a variety of other

languages and will therefore transform itself, as exemplified in the case of Singlish. Since

contemporary Singapore witnesses an increasingly large number of inter-ethnic marriages, and of

transnational economic activities and communications, learning English will mean learning the

language within its changing local and global context, rather than “fixating on an established and

unevolved form of the language.” I agree with Lee that Singlish will not be detrimental to social

development if it remains an informal register alongside the Standard English promoted by the

Nguyen 5



government as the formal register. The government’s efforts to advocate the efficacy of Standard

English, although reasonable, might never totally alienate Singlish from the Singaporean pathos.

Lee then returns to my initial question about her definition of “native language” and

“mother tongue,” or of any similar terms that are used interchangeably. At last, she remains

consistent with her original answer: Singlish is her native language, the language of her homeland

that she grew up speaking (18). Mother tongue, meanwhile, is as a forced concept being internalized

in the young generation through mandatory schooling. According to her country’s bilingual

education policy, English is the official language of instruction in all school curriculums, but it is

compulsory for students to achieve high proficiency in their Mother Tongue—Mandarin for

Chinese, Malay for Malays and Tamil for Dravidian-speaking Indians. Such a policy was enforced

because the government believes that English, as the lingua franca of world trade, science and

technology, would empower Singaporeans to become competitive employees in a globalized market,

while the Mother Tongue Languages would allow the general population to appreciate Eastern

culture through their native languages, to maintain their respective ethnic identity, and to respect and

safeguard their Asian heritage. However, Lee senses that if she follows the government’s line of

reasoning, the mother tongue that she should have studied is Hokkien, the “first language” of her

parents and grandparents, not Mandarin. As the government aims at promoting a “culturally

prestigious” Singaporean identity both by advancing Mandarin as the sole representative of Chinese

culture and by prompting a mindset that prizes Standard English above Singapore English, Lee

believes that the young generation in Singapore has been “forced to adopt a desirable mother

tongue.”



Although Lee discerns that language planning more or less helps facilitate communications

between the diverse races, fortify social stability, and position Singapore well in the global economy,

the prevailing questions of whether language policies catalyze or wreck the construction of local and

Nguyen 6



national identity remain.  In Singapore, language planning does not simply help create a unified

Singaporean identity but has instead become a didactic medium through which the government can

project their assumptions, however problematic or fallacious, on how a Singaporean identity should

be constructed. The discrimination against certain language options have resulted in some serious

consequences, such as the disruption of generational transmission of historical knowledge and

cultural heritage. In the end, both Lee and I concur that the efficiency of the government’s language

policies should be carefully reexamined, perhaps not in terms of the intrinsic qualities of the

language such as its capacity to generate economic benefits and higher social status, but in the sense

of how national identity should be defined and nurtured through the way people use language.






