Rod Beale 
 
Introduction to Linguistics 
 
Brook Lillehaugen 

 
Being Russian in New York City 
 
Nicole Litvitskiy (1) 
 
Age 19 (2) 
 
Abstract: Nicole Litvitsky has grown up her entire life in Brooklyn, New York City, in a 
neighborhood that was predominantly Russian and Jewish. She learned Russian as her first 
language through her parents and grandparents, and later learned English from her sister and her 
parents before starting grade school. The abundance of multilingualism in her schools and her 
upbringing in general has shaped her view on being bilingual, and how it relates to her self-
identity. As a first generation American, she hopes to preserve her first language and her culture 
by teaching her future children the Russian language and traditions. 
 
  

After noticing the way Nicole—a friend that lives in my apartment—would talk to her 
mom on the phone in a beautiful Russian-English mix of words and sentences that seemed to 
interweave seamlessly, I knew she would be a perfect interviewee for our multilingualism 
project. Nicole Litvitskiy has lived in Brooklyn her entire life. She was born on April 2nd, 1998, 
5 years after her parents moved from Russia during the mass post-Soviet emigration to the 
United States. (3) She grew up in Coney Island, in the southern end of Brooklyn near Brighton 
Beach, a neighborhood that houses a large population of Russian-speaking immigrants. New 
York City in this way is known for having large neighborhoods of immigrant families of the 
same cultural heritages, creating a sense of communal identity in a widely diverse city. Because 
of this, Nicole’s identity as a first-generation American was profoundly influenced by her first 
language and the culture of her family, friends, and neighborhood.  

Nicole learned Russian as her first language because of the prevalence of the language in 

her home and her community. (11) She learned Russian primarily from her grandparents, who 
often took care of her while her parents were at work. Nicole later learned English at around 3 

years old, with the help of her older sister and the interaction with public schools that she went to 
in the Bensonhurst neighborhood. (5) Her sister, who is four and a half years older than her, had 
taken an ESL (English as a Second Language) class and was able to help her learn grammatically 
correct English. Nicole remembers her sister teaching her how to say “May I please use the 
restroom?” when she started the Pre-K at her local public preschool.  However, as she described 
her high school as being “95% multilingual people”, she never felt out of place in the English-
dominated Brooklyn school system she was a part of. Moreover, she mostly spoke English with 
her friends and classmates early on in grade school and the second language quickly became her 
most dominant. 
         Nicole now considers English to be her dominant language, as she has had to 
predominantly use the language throughout her life, with the exception of speaking to her 
Russian-speaking family members and occasional phrases with her Russian-speaking friends. 
Because of this, she is fluent in English and has been since before grade school, with only a 
slight roll of her R’s to give a hint that she is bilingual. (6, 7) Even so, Nicole considers herself 
and has always considered herself to be Russian, as opposed to Russian American. She explains 
that this is quite possibly due to the climate of New York City and the way in which people 
define their heritage as based on the country that their family is from. “A lot of it is regional. 
Nobody from New York calls themselves ‘something-American.’ A lot of those people are first-
generation Americans. By newspapers and stuff, we are definitely referred to as Russian-
American and Chinese-American, but nobody in those communities refers to themselves that 
way.” She also gives me the example that her friends from Bangladesh described themselves as 
Bengali as opposed to Bengali American. We talk about how New York City has a very large 
immigrant population, and that these immigrants from the same countries generally tend to settle 
in the same neighborhoods. She poses that these close-knit linguistically and culturally similar 
neighborhoods as a possible reason why first-generation immigrants still refer to themselves as 
Bengali or Russian.  

Like many other first-generation Americans, Nicole learned English out of necessity, but 

made a conscious decision in high school to keep a fluent understanding of Russian in order to 
communicate with members of her family that couldn’t speak English, like her grandparents. (9, 
10) She has both school friends and friends that she made in upstate New York who speak 
Russian but she tells me she mostly speaks English with her friends and practices her Russian 

primarily with her mom. Her and her mom have phone conversations where Nicole speaks a mix 
of Russian and English, and her mom speaks only in Russian as a way of keeping her proficient 
in the oral language. She told me part of the reason for this ‘Runglish’ is that it is very easy and 
fluid to transition from Russian to English in the middle of sentences, and that some phrases 
were easier to convey through Russian or vice versa. (30) For example, she told me that phrases 
beginning with the word “so” was easier to convey in English as opposed to Russian, and that 
she still uses the word “like” as a space-filler even when she was speaking in Russian. Although 
she lost a good amount of her Russian conversational skill in elementary and middle school 
because of English dominating her social life, she was able to regain fluency in high school and 
now in college through conscious effort and the help of her mom.  

Nicole started to consciously work on her conversational skill in Russian starting in high 
school when she began working at a Russian-speaking daycare, where she continued to work for 
two summers. She also practiced her Russian at a Russian-speaking psychiatric office, and 
continued her conversational proficiency there. She now considers herself orally fluent in 
Russian from this deliberate relearning, but is taking Russian independent studies classes here in 
order to understand the grammar rules behind her first language. Nicole found it interesting how 
she first learned Russian naturally through listening to her family, but never actually learned the 
grammatical rules behind it. Nicole didn’t know the full Russian alphabet and was not able to 
read or write in Russian before she came to Haverford. She talks about how “the Russian 
alphabet has multiple letters to signify different sounds that in English are normally only formed 
by one letter or combinations of letters,” and in many common Russian words, the vowel sounds 
don’t match up with the way the word is colloquially said. (12) Needless to say, learning an 
alphabet with new characters that look similar to English letters but have completely separate 
meanings is very confusing and takes time to learn. She is dedicated, however, to be able to 
become fully fluent in reading, writing, and speaking in Russian, deciding that “it would pay off 
more” to practice her skills with a language that she was already very familiar with, as opposed 
to Spanish, which she had taken for six years but still did not feel nearly proficient in. 

Not only can the Russian alphabet confusing, but Nicole also t1ells me how she comes 

across instances in her life when the nature of formality in spoken Russian can get a bit 
confusing. Because there is a formal and informal way to say “you” in Russian, she gets a little 
confused at times on how to address her elders in Russian. For example, she almost exclusively 

used the formal version of you, “vy,” at her psychiatric office assistant job, but uses the informal 
version, “ty,” when speaking to her elder close family friends that she met during summers in 
upstate New York. (28) When talking to her stepmom, she is often confused about whether or 
not to say “you” in the formal or informal grammatical tense. The formality of “you” in Russian 
differs among different soviet states and regions. For example, in Russia it is acceptable to refer 
to close family members by the informal version of you, but in places like Uzbekistan and 
Kazhakstan and other eastern Soviet Union countries, one must strictly adhere to the formal 
version of “you” to anyone that is your elder, regardless of family ties. Despite the confusing 
lexicon, Nicole still associates a strong familial tie with Russian as this was the language and 
culture around which she grew up. (20) 

Nicole sees her bilingualism in a different light after coming to college at Haverford, her 

first long period of exposure to the more homogenous side of America. She explained how, in 
her words “it wasn’t so odd to me before because New York is so multilingual, and so I was 
always with people who were bilingual.” She goes on to tell me how she took a class last 
semester at Haverford called “English Learners in the U.S.” and how she learned about the ways 
in which the English language is very dominant in this country, and how success is highly 
contingent on learning the language. “Bilingualism is such a valuable skill, and there is so much 
policy from the government that pushes into an English-only style of teaching and being as a 
nation… that English is the right language, and that’s it.” (31) Nicole’s bilingualism seemed to 
have become much more valuable to her after being exposed to this, and she replied with a firm 
head nod when asked if she wanted her children to be bilingual like her. 

Nicole’s experience with bilingualism growing up in the diverse New York City has 

given her a unique perspective on the way cultural identity is formed for first-generation citizens. 
She considers multilingualism and a diversity of cultures to be an essential exposure to everyone, 
and considers her bilingual and multicultural experience in the Big Apple as one that has helped 
her gain a perspective on the world that has ultimately made her a better person. 
 
	

