Ines Purcell 

Linguistics 101 

Professor Lillehaugen 

February 19th, 2017 

 

Open Doors 

Claudia Chung is a freshman at Bryn Mawr College. She is 18 but will turn 19 very soon.   She 
was born in Hong Kong and grew up there until she left for the states to go to a boarding High 
School in Massachusetts. In Hong Kong growing up her parents spoke to her in Cantonese, while 
she was exposed to Mandarin and English in her primary school. She started learning French when 
she  was  in  6th  grade,  and  claims  she  has  a  “working  proficiency”  in  French  (6).  She  considers 
Cantonese and English as her primary languages however she relates the most to Cantonese, as it 
reminds her of her home and culture. She likes to view her multilingualism as doorways to different 
cultures, but also how it can be viewed as something negative in one’s own culture. This interview, 
among other things, examines the way multilingualism shapes one’s identity, and their relationship 
with the rest of the world. 

 

 

Hong Kong is a city that is caught in between the old and the new, the east and the west: 

a dialectic of languages and cultures mixed together to create a unique landscape. Technically 

not a part of China, Hong Kong is an old British colony that still has questionable ties to its 

western parents. It is a city full of open doors into different cultures and different worlds. 

Claudia, born and raised in Hong Kong, grew up within this dichotomy of east and west. When 

she was thirteen her parents sent her to a prestigious boarding school in the suburbs of Boston 

Massachusetts, and has been continuing her college education here in the States, where I met her. 

We were randomly selected to be roommates, something which I am eternally grateful for. The 

first thing you notice when you enter our room are the large quantities of books in all different 

languages, mirroring the depth of knowledge Claudia holds. Then you’ll notice the paper 

pineapple mobiles hanging around our ceiling, something which we thought would be amusing 

to add to our room décor. Claudia and I have bonded over our similar multi-cultural backgrounds 

and our love for books and the arts. Our relationship, which varies from serious late night 

cultural discussions to absolute absurdity is a hallmark of Claudia’s personality, and you are 

immediately welcomed into her world, a world of diversity and as she puts it “open doors”. 

 

Claudia learned Cantonese through speaking with her parents and family at home, while 

the schools in Hong Kong taught Claudia English and Mandarin (5). She remembers singing 

English nursery rhymes when she was in kindergarten, but doesn’t recall learning the language 

2 

 

stating “I’ve known English basically since I was a toddler” (12). However, when she talked 

about her experience dealing with Mandarin and Cantonese (two languages that share the same 

characters yet sound completely different) she confesses “I remember being very confused as to 

why the same thing can sound two different ways” (12). She however distinctly remembers 

learning French; “I’m pretty good with languages so pronunciation wise I was fine, it was more 

learning a completely new set of grammar, and especially because French is a romance language 

so it has gender and a completely different set of norms” (12). Although she has known 

Mandarin since a very young age, she has lost some degree of comfort in speaking, reading, and 

writing since she doesn’t practice it daily. A common joke between us, she laughs about how 

none of the Chinese foreign students like her (since she’s from Hong Kong) so they never talk to 

her (13) Instead, she resorts to reading books to keep her Mandarin in check. Her ability to tap 

into a wide variety of languages and cultures does leave her overwhelmed at times. I asked her 

about the cons of being bilingual she responded, “your brain is constantly muddled up, like I 

have to compartmentalizes a lot of things” (31). Although she has access to all these different 

doorways through her way of compartmentalizing ideas, throughout the interview she constantly 

refers back to her roots in Hong Kong. 

Even though Claudia has spent the last five years speaking English in the States and 

learning French, she has very close ties to her city and Cantonese.  She describes what it is like 

to feel connected to a place that is so culturally diverse: “I think it’s kinda weird for me to say 

that I belong to Hong Kong. Hong Kong is a very international place, like it’s really funny”, she 

pauses and chuckles a little to herself, “I didn’t even know there was a problem with diversity in 

colleges because I grew up with people from Kenya and Mauritius and from all over the world so 

when I came to the States and realized these people were all from the same state I was like this is 

really weird” (21). She later adds to clarify the affect that the United States has had on her, “of 

course I’ve picked up bits and pieces of New England culture on the way”, looking down at her 

navy-blue Vineyard Vine long sleeve and laughing. While she thinks of English as a “bland and 

common language”, a purely utilitarian language, she relates Cantonese with her family and her 

home. She also acknowledges that it is a dying language, distinctly local, yet at the same time 

distinctly global due to the diversity of people living in Hong Kong. This gives the language, as 

she puts it, “an international vibe”. She sees Mandarin as a doorway to the other side of Hong 

Kong, the side attached to its nationalistic Chinese roots. She has a much more romantic view of 

3 

 

French however, and thinks of French in terms of history and art (20). While she views these 

different languages as doorways to different concepts and aspects of her life, she doesn’t 

explicitly think differently in these languages. 

Different doors usually lead to different places, so I was surprised when Claudia 

confessed that she does not think in different languages on different occasions. She confesses 

that instead of thinking in different languages, she prefers to think in concepts. She explained 

that since she is a very visual person, things get less “muddled” by thinking in concepts (14). 

However, having personally heard her speak a variety of English, Cantonese, and French in her 

sleep, I can attest that she dreams in different languages. She clarifies that the languages she 

dreams in are dependent on the people she is interacting with (15). However, she shrugged at the 

question regarding whether one language comes out naturally in relation to a certain emotion. 

The only thing she noticed was that when she gets angry her English turns into a British accent 

(16). I was also surprised to hear that when asked if she behaved differently in another language 

all she said was “not consciously” (27). I got the impression that she doesn’t really think about 

how the different languages affect her thoughts, and if they do it’s not consciously notable. She 

also translates this into her social life, and the relationships with other people in different 

doorways. 

When Claudia talked about different relationships in different languages, she divided her 

interactions into formal and friendly interactions, claiming that it was pretty much the same in 

each language. She noticed however that Cantonese (as a language) does not have many formal 

words compared to her other languages, formality in Cantonese depends on the tone. Because of 

this she has to focus more on the way she stresses certain words rather than the words themselves 

(28). She later goes on to talk about the different cultural relations between each of her 

languages. Another standing joke of ours is complaining about how awful French people are so 

naturally she brought up the example of trying to speak to a Frenchman in English, and how they 

will straight up ignore you. However, if you speak to them in French they will be much more 

open in helping you. She brought in her own perspective also, enthusiastically stating that if an 

American were to come up to her in Hong Kong and attempted to speak in Cantonese she would 

willingly help him. Because of her experiences, she views as being multilingual as a way of 

4 

 

connecting with people, an “open door” (31). However, this ability to open doors does have its 

downfalls.  

When I asked her whether she has ever had to hide any of her languages she said that 

sometimes she pretends she is not as fluent in English as she seems, so as not to be viewed as 

“westernized” by her family members. She mentions a cultural stigma towards loosing Mandarin 

in Chinese culture, as that is viewed as a sign of “westernization”. She tells me an anecdote 

while laughing (she loves to make fun of English): “one of the slang words for English in 

Cantonese is chicken intestines. Back when we were still under colonial rule all the kids would 

be forced to learn script in school. The older Chinese generation know that we are learning 

English in school they instantly think to the curly scribbly cursive and they say you’re writing 

chicken intestines! So, like you can tell it’s not a good connotation, its literally organs of an 

animal.  But also, like they think you’re being “Americanized” and “westernized” that you’re 

being removed from your culture. So, for the older generation sometimes I have to try extra to 

impress them on Chinese or Japanese” (32).  

Being multilingual for Claudia is more than just being able to speak in multiple different 

languages. Having the experience of being able to live full time in two different countries has 

really shaped her thinking about the implications of language on culture and vice versa. She 

acknowledges that “being multilingual is sort of a privilege”. Claudia, having traveled 

extensively around the world, understands the depths of diversity this world has to offer. (19). 

She views being multilingual not as knowing a lot of languages, rather, as an understanding of a 

wide variety of cultures, a tool to open new doorways. Taking the question “What does it mean 

for you to be multilingual” a step further, she tells me “I think being bilingual is almost like not 

just a privilege but also your job. Now you have to go out and make people understand the two 

sides of the world you come from or whatever your experiences are, widen people’s perspective” 

(12). 

 

  

