 

Elisa Sheen 
LING101 - Introduction to Linguistics 
Professor Brook Danielle Lillehaugen 
March 29, 2017 
 

Firmly Living in Two Languages 

Song Joong-Ki is 20 years old and a sophomore at Haverford 
College  (1,2). He was born and raised in California and his 
family continues to live there (3). He knows three languages: 
English, Korean, and Spanish (4). Song Joong-Ki learned 

Korean at home, English when he began attending school and 

Spanish in high school for the language requirement (5). 

 

When asked whether he has ever attempted to hide his bilingualism, Song Joong-Ki 

replied, when I was younger I used to think that “If I speak Korean to my mom they’re going to 
think I’m weird but at a certain age... I was like ‘whatever [chuckles] I don’t care. YOLO!’” (32) 
It was a classic response coming from Song Joong-Ki. Either candidly frank or beautifully 
eloquent but never without a touch of humor to lighten the mood, Song Joong-Ki enjoys writing 
poetry and aspires to go to medical school after he graduates from Haverford College. He can 
often be found at night with the “late night feels” to inspire his poem writing while he listens to 
Korean music with a friend. 

Song Joong-Ki was born and raised in California, around one hour away from LA. He 
grew up with his parents who only spoke Korean to him (8, 9, 10). It was not until he started 
school when he began to learn and speak English (5). Song tends to speak English to his siblings 
unless he wishes to say something to them that he does not want other people around him to 
hear; then, he will speak in Korean (8, 9, 10). From 9th to 11th grade, Song Joong-Ki studied 
Spanish in order to fulfill the language requirement. He explained that his father is fluent in 
Spanish and then followed with a typical Song answer, “Sometimes I’d say random Spanish stuff 
to him and he’d be like LOLs you’re so bad.” As it became apparent that Song Joong-Ki’s 

 
 

1 

 

Spanish was pretty limited at this time in his life, we continued the interview with a focus more 
on English and Korean. 

Song Joong-Ki would consider himself “pretty fluent” in English, citing his ability to 

write essays in the language. For Korean, Song is fluent conversationally in that he can ask for 
basic needs but lacks the mastery of Korean “to argue crazy, complex or specialized things like 
politics” (6). He would consider English as his dominant language but considers himself a native 
speaker of Korean (7). He added that “Korean is closer to my heart. That was the first language I 
learned so it is only natural… It is like the mother tongue you know. Speaking Korean to me is 
something I do with my family,” and naturally with other Korean people “essentially because it’s 
another way to bond with them.” He believes that “language is the root of a culture. In the same 
way, when you can share that language, it creates that natural bond” (8). In addition to speaking 
Korean at home, he attributes his proficiency to watching Korean dramas, listening to music and 
reading media (13).  

Although he tends to speak Korean solely to his family and Korean friends, he appears to 

live firmly in both languages. Song Joong-Ki can seamlessly switch between Korean and 
English. He explained that “respect is a pretty important covenant in Korean. There is a separate 
set of language that is dedicated to respect so I always use it with adults who are older than me.” 
If someone older than Song who spoke Korean approaches him, Song Joong-Ki is able to 
“default to that respect language.” In a robotic voice he explained that it is not like “All right, 
adult is coming forward. Time to turn off all uses of English, use only Korean in this context” 
(27). Song mostly thinks in English; however, there are times when he will revert to Korean (14). 
When he is angry he will sometimes curse in Korean out loud. He admitted, “no one knows 
because it is in Korean. Like if [I] drop something I’ll say something by accident and then [say to 
myself] like oh, I shouldn’t ​curse​ you know” (16). Other times he said “I’ll think in Korean 
when I can’t express it in English.” I asked for an example to which he replied, “there’s a certain 
word called like… ​dap dap hae​ in Korean. It’s like claustrophobic but not really. It’s like 
claustrophobia and frustration mixed together but there is no true definition that you can give in 
English. It’s like when someone goes super slow in lab and you’re waiting for them to go next. 
It’s frustration but it feels like there is someone grabbing your chest and constricting you kind 

2 

 

of.” At times Song Joong-Ki will try to translate a Korean word to English-speaking friends. He 
explains that “I’ll try to get them to get the feel of the word... You think that if you know two 
languages you think you can interchange them easily but that is not always the case” (26).  

When asked whether he identifies or associates with one or both cultures, he replied that 

he does not feel like he belongs to one or both cultures (21). He added that “it’s more like 
neither. I do identify with certain aspects of both cultures but I can’t say that each one 
necessarily captures the whole of my identity. This is in a lot of articles but Asian Americans say 
that they are not part of the American culture nor the Asian culture… There is a lot of 
[conflicting] and different aspects of society and values. You can’t group them into either.” 

I followed with a question about what it meant for him to be bilingual. After a moment of 

thought he revealed,  “It’s something like what my poetry teacher has said. When people who 
speak multiple languages think about the world, they can view it in two different ways... And 
because of that they have a more accurate picture of the world because they can view it in more 
perspectives.” He added that “with more languages comes more opportunities to communicate, 
more knowledge, more ability to talk to people and understand them” (19). From his various 
English-speaking and Korean-speaking relationships to his poetry writing in English and his love 
for Korean dramas and music, he lives in both languages and does not feel the pressure to hide 
his Korean language as he did when he was younger. As Song so eloquently added in response to 
the question about hiding his bilingualism, “I can speak to people in Korean… And Korean food 
is good… Also, I can talk to ​yuhj’s  in Korean so everything works out!” (32) 
 

1

 

1 ​y​uhj: ​Song Joong-Ki’s own slang for ​yuhjah​ in Korean for “girl.” Often used in the context of a 
girl that a boy is interested in or likes. 
3 

