Breanna D’Antonio
Finding the Right Words:

An interview with Itzél


Itzél  is  22  years  old,  born  in  NYC,  and  grew  up  in  Spanish  Harlem.  She  currently  lives  in

Philadelphia. She is fluent in both Spanish and English. She learned Spanish from birth and was

later taught English in school. Itzél considers English to be more dominant at the present because

she  uses  it  to  communicate  in  many  aspects  of  her  daily  life.  However,  she  uses  Spanish  to

communicate with her mother and siblings and with some of her friends; she also uses it in the

workplace fairly often. She now speaks English in her home, but spoke Spanish in her childhood

home. This interview covers a variety of themes, with emphasis on the independent learning Itzél

completed,  the  experience  of  judgement  because  of  her  bilingualism,  and  feeling  a  significant

amount of responsibility to her family as a result of her English fluency.



Itzél was born in New York City and grew up in Spanish Harlem (1, 3). She currently

lives in Philadelphia and is a Haverford House Fellow for the 2016-2017 year. Itzél graduated

from Haverford College in 2016 and majored in Comparative Literature. Spanish and English are

two languages that she is fluent in, having learned her first language—Spanish—from the time

that she was “in the womb”, and continues to speak it today at 22 years old (2, 4). Itzél uses

Spanish to communicate with her family, as that is the primary language spoken in her household

(10). She learned her second language—English—from a young age in public school (5). Itzél is

bilingual not by choice, but out of necessity. She was enrolled in bilingual classes where she

received instruction in both English and Spanish when she first entered the school system.

Around the time she turned 8 or 9 years old, she was moved to English-only classes. It was hard

for her to keep up at first, because she was still learning how to read and write in Spanish. Itzél

had to put in a lot of extra work outside of the classroom so that she would not fall behind, as

there were many kids in her class and the teachers did not have the resources to provide the level

of instruction that each student needed to thrive (12). To combat this, Itzél remembers going

above and beyond the instruction that she received in school to become proficient in English. It

was a solo effort because she could not ask her family for help as they do not speak English. She



2

would watch tv shows in English, like Arthur or other shows on PBS to practice speaking. She

would also visit the library and check out children’s books and then copy them, word-for-word,

so that she could practice writing in English. Itzél did all of these things independently as a

young child because there was no other option; she had no other choice but to learn English. Her

experience, while rewarding, also meant that she had to conduct herself with a level of maturity

and self-awareness that is uncommon for someone so young.

Itzél’s identity as a bilingual individual is built upon the particular language that she

chooses to use in each of her interactions, whether they be in personal or professional spheres.

Itzél feels “very fluent” in both Spanish and English, and is able to converse freely in the two

languages (6). In terms of language dominance, she maintains that it depends on the situation and

her surroundings, and for the past few years, she has mostly spoken English (7). She attributes

this to her time spent at Haverford, a place where English is the primary spoken language, as

well as her current job where English is also the principal mode of communication (8). However,

if she is with her mother or any one of her five siblings, she will speak Spanish (9).  Now that

she no longer lives in her childhood home but in a community house with five other recent

Haverford graduates, Itzél continues to communicate predominantly in English (10). It is clear

that the language she uses depends on her setting and the people that surround her, and is a

significant aspect of Itzél’s narrative as a bilingual person existing in a predominantly

monolingual country. Furthermore, Itzél’s language choice functions, in part, as a gatekeeper that

separates two distinctive cultures that are central to Itzél’s identity.

At times Itzél has accidentally mixed up both of her languages. Sometimes she will try to

say something, but mix up the order of the words, as Spanish and English differ in their word

order pattern. She goes on to say that “I also mix up my languages to jump back and forth

between identities.” (17) Being a Latina is an essential facet of her identity, and the use of

Spanglish is a further aspect of her Latinidad. Itzél elaborates by stating “When I am speaking

English with my Latino friends, I always want to include Spanish because I don’t want to ever

not include that part of me. Especially with other Latinos.” She continues by adding, “And it’s

not because I feel pressured, but because I want them to know that I still feel connected to

Mexico.” Speaking Spanish is an important part of who she is as a Mexican-American, and she

describes how the use of both languages to her is about “working through a duality” and that the



3

continued expression of her identity through the use of Spanish and English allows her to never

leave each one of the cultures behind.

As a Mexican-American, Itzél has connections to both cultures (21). However, Itzél feels

that she belongs more to Mexican culture, despite the fact that she now speaks English more

often than Spanish. However, in reflecting on whether American culture accepts her she says, “I

don’t feel like society sees me and thinks that my dominant language is English.” When speaking

Spanish, she feels “rooted and grounded” in her upbringing. Her connection to Spanish culture is

a combination of enjoying her Spanish roots but also feeling “pushed out” by American culture

because she does not fit the traditional white American mold, and this causes her to retreat “back

into my Spanish circle” at times. It becomes clear that Itzél has experienced differential

treatment as a result of her bilingualism (32). She explains that she sometimes feels that people

judge her based on her outward appearance, and expect that she will be unable to converse in

English. It is a different story in her household, however. At home, her knowledge of English is

valued because most of her family is monolingual. She feels a lot of responsibility, but also that

she is an asset because she can use her English fluency to help her family. Itzél refers to herself

as a “language broker” to describe her role as a translator or interpreter on behalf of her family.

When she was still in the process of learning English, Itzél had to translate important documents

for her family, and she felt obligated to give the best possible translation, even though this was

not always feasible because she would come across words and concepts that she was unable to

understand as a young child.

Itzél is also treated differently in her place of employment. She currently works at an

organization that provides legal assistance to low-income populations, and her Spanish fluency is

especially useful. Itzél generally enjoys using her Spanish to help clients; however, she

sometimes feels that the other staff “unload their language burdens” on her because she is

bilingual. Sometimes the staff assume that she is more available to complete language tasks

because she is a native Spanish speaker.



As someone who assumes the role of an interpreter often, Itzél has experience with

coming across words that exist in one of her languages but not the other. When this happens, she

says she must “put a little bit more thought into finding the right words in that language. It is

more than direct translation.” (26) It takes time because she wants to make sure that a particular

word in a language is really getting the point across. For Itzél, it is important that she chooses the



4

words that most accurately represent what is being said because her translations have direct

implications for the individuals they reflect, whether she is translating for her family or for

clients.

Itzél summarizes her bilingual experience by stating, “It’s cool to be bilingual,” she

pauses for a moment and adds, “but also tiring.” In saying this, Itzél chooses to frame her

experience in a largely positive light, while still recognizing the tension that she feels in

navigating the responsibilities of being bilingual.




