Charlie Frindt
A Menagerie of Language

Diane is a 19-year-old multilingual speaker of French, Haitian Creole, English, and basic Spanish. She

was born in Boston but grew up in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.  She came back to America five years ago to

attend high school in Boston which is when she learned how to speak English. French and Haitian Creole

used to be her dominant languages but now she also considers English among them and is fluent in all

three. She mainly speaks with her parents and friends in Haiti in French and Haitian Creole while using

English at school. However, she speaks all four of her languages at home because her family can speak all

of them. She is positive about her multilingualism, finding it both useful as a way to more fully express

herself and as a way to open up more opportunities for her. Her languages also often mix together and she

ends up having to switch between all of them constantly and forgets some at times, usually after having

spoken one for so long.

My discussion with my friend Diane started off on a light note, with her joking about her

name, saying it was “Olivia Protsky” (it’s not) (1). She continued this when she told me that she

was born in the “United States of America” and had to be pressed for specifics until she told me

that it was Massachusetts and then that it was Boston . She also gave me a half-confusing answer

about where she lived, saying it was Boston, Haiti, and Haverford, while also noting that both of

her parents lived in Boston and Haiti at the exact same time, somehow (they live exclusively in

Haiti) (3).  After this light-hearted intro, however, we really got into a serious discussion of her

multilingual experience and it became clear pretty quickly that despite her multilingualism she

still identifies strongly with Haiti.

Diane grew-up in Port-au-Prince, Haiti where they speak both French and Haitian Creole.

However, to her both of these languages are interchangeable because Haitian Creole is “basically

80% French” (9). When she forgets a word in one of them, she substitutes it with a word from

the other one because they are so similar. She also ended up having to learn some Spanish “for

fun,” as she and her parents used to take trips to the Dominican Republic and at one point they

stopped translating for her, forcing her to learn a bit of Spanish (11). These were the only

languages she could speak until she came to America for high school, when she had to learn

English in order communicate with others.  She mainly learned English by watching television

with the subtitles on and also by having others correct her pronunciation of words (12). This is

2



because she considers English to be a “very lazy language” compared to French and Spanish,

which she feels have more predictable grammars and sentence structures compared to English,

with rules that can be followed in regard to these.  As a result, she felt it was easier to learn

English from television than by having lessons in it, which was helped by the fact that she knew

some conversational English from primary school. It was at this point that she recalled the

beginning of her time in high school when she would write essays in French before translating

them into English. She did this until she was told not to, forcing her to both think and write in

English when she would not otherwise (12). Because of the many languages she has learned,

Diane now speaks multiple languages at home in Haiti because her family is also multilingual.

They usually just “mix them all in” and she notes that they even “throw some German in there”

(her family has visited Germany and Switzerland recently) as well in addition to French, Haitian

Creole, English, and Spanish (10).

When we moved on to some of the deeper questions regarding her language use, she

provided some very interesting responses. She thinks in French and Haitian Creole a lot of the

time, which often results in her realizing that she needs to translate back into English because

others don’t speak those languages (14). She also dreams in more than one language, with her

romantic dreams usually in either French or Spanish and the ones where she’s stressing out about

school in English. As well, she sometimes even dreams in Italian, German, and Russian. She’s

not surprised by the first one as it is very similar to Spanish and French in structure and she’s

been picking up German through her recent trips to Germany and Switzerland. However, she has

no idea why she dreams in Russian sometimes because she doesn’t know how to speak it at all

(15).

When it comes to thought and behavior, Diane says that one of the main things she

notices is that her “voices changes when [she] is speaking every different language.” She finds

French and Haitian Creole to be more expressive languages and has an easier time expressing her

emotions through them. This is opposed to English, which she feels is more restrictive for her in

expressing her emotions, despite the fact that she finds it easy to study and “looser” than French

or Haitian Creole (27). As a result, she speaks French and Haitian Creole when she’s angry, but

predominantly Haitian Creole because it is the “most vulgar language out of all four of them.”

We proceeded to have an illuminating discussion about swearing, which Diane says come more

3



naturally to her in Haitian Creole because she grew up swearing in that language. She also says

that sometimes if you “want to be very offensive to someone without them knowing, it’s

convenient” to do so in another language. When it comes to specific swear words, she says that

Haitian Creole has much deeper insults than English does, saying that the equivalent of

“motherf*****” is so insulting to one’s mother that “it’s the sort of thing that you would get

punched or killed over” (16). All of this showed me how strong her connection to Haiti is

through her usage of French and Haitian Creole.

With language usage, Diane mixes up her languages all of the time, especially after she

has been speaking French and Haitian Creole for an extended period of time and then coming

back to America. She also gets mixed up with false cognates in English, for example using

“velocity” instead of “voltage” because that is similar to the French word for the same idea. She

also tends to mix them up when she is sleep deprived and “completely forgets all words in

English,” so she ends up speaking in a “French-Haitian Creole-English hybrid and hoping it

makes sense” (17). Despite this, it is usually instantaneous for her to switch between languages.

The only time it is slower is also when she’s coming back from Haiti and she has to switch from

speaking French and Haitian Creole to English. For example, at customs when they are asking

her questions there’s often a delay in her remembering that she has to speak English and not

French/Haitian Creole. She describes the transition as “when you come from cold water…and

are going to go to warm water and it takes a while to adjust” (30). She also often finds herself

encountering words and phrases that only exist in one of her languages and not the other, saying

that this happens whenever she is trying to find the best way to express an idea. This usually

comes up with proverbs, as there are certain proverbs in French and Haitian Creole that don’t

translate well to English. She gave an example of one; “bringing a snake to school is one, but

making it learn is two/the second.” She says it means something like “it’s one thing to bring

someone to school, but it’s another thing to make them learn” (26). Obviously the literal

translation doesn’t make sense in English, but she says it has biblical roots in the sense that

snakes are viewed as treacherous and inclined toward betrayal, so getting them to learn

something different is quite a feat.

Despite the blending together of her languages in usage, she associates her languages

with completely different countries, Haiti for French and Haitian Creole and America for

4



English. She sees things this way because she travels a lot so countries and their languages

naturally go together for her. In addition, the French spoken in Haiti is different than the French

spoken in France so it makes more sense for her to associate each variate of French with the

country it is spoken in than with something else (20). However, it’s completely different

situation when it comes to culture. Even though she says she can be a “greedy, lazy American”

or a “hot-headed Haitian,” she ultimately identifies with Haiti and it values, saying that her

familial and cultural ones are more in line with Haiti than with America (21). Her

multilingualism has not caused her to lose sight of who she is and what culture she identifies

with.

As Diane reflected on her multilingualism, she saw it as having a positive influence on

her life. Among the benefits, she points out that she can travel to many places and can more

easily express herself. She also says that it “kicks ass” and allows her to get better jobs. Finally,

as she hesitated to remember what the word was in English, she said that it makes her “well-

rounded” in a cultural sense. When it comes to drawbacks, she says that there are instances when

she “slips out” of a language, as in she is thinking of a word in one language but forgets how to

say it in the other, that results in a delay in being able to say something. There’s also the fact that

she’s constantly translating and that even though she is good enough that she doesn’t notice it,

there are occasions where this breaks down and she ends up literally “lost in translation.” She

understandably finds it harder to remember English words than French or Haitian Creole ones

(31). Diane encapsulated her attitude toward her multilingualism when she told me at the end of

the interview that she “loves it when [she] start[s] speaking a different language if someone

doesn’t speak it.” She enjoys being able to speak multiple languages, as she told me that it made

her applications, especially her résumé, look really great. The only serious downside she finds in

how others treat her is that people are always expecting her to translate things, which she finds

annoying (32). Of course, that comes with knowing more than one language. Overall, Diane’s

multilingualism has not caused her to lose her identity and she remains deeply rooted in Haiti

and its culture and values, even if her ability to speak other languages has proven to be an asset

to her in life.






